LXX
CCWhom Lovest Thou Most?"
WH EN the victorious army reached Medina after their seven weeks' absence they found that Ja'far and his companions were already there. He had left for Abyssinia at the age of twenty­
seven and was now a man of forty. He had not seen the Prophet for thirteen years, though they had been in constant communication. The Prophet clasped him to him and kissed him between the eyes. Then he said: "I know not for which of the two my rejoicing is greater, for the advent of ja'far or for the victory of Khaybar." With Ja'far was his wife Asrna' and their three sons, 'Abd Allah, Muhammad and 'Awn, who had been born in Abyssinia.
With him also was Umm Habibah, whose apartment was ready to receive her, and a second marriage feast was held to celebrate her union with the Prophet. She was now about thirty-five years old. The other wives, all except 'A'ishah, had known her in Mecca. She was, moreover, the sister-in-law of Zaynab, and Sawdah andUmm Salamah had been her close companions in their early days together in Abyssinia. Her coming had been expected, and caused little stir. An object of much greater concern to the wives was the unexpected addition to their household, the young and beautiful Safiyyah, On their arrival in Medina the Prophet lodged her temporarily in one of the houses of the ever-hospitable Harithah; and hearing of her beauty, 'A'ishah sent to Umm Salamah to ask her about their new companion. "She is beautiful indeed," said Umm Salamah, "and the Messenger of God loveth her much." 'A'ishah went to the house of Harithah and entered with the throng of women who were visiting the new bride. She herself was veiled, and without revealing her identity she remained somewhat in the background, but close enough to see for herself that what Umm Salamah had said was true. Then she left the house, but the Prophet who was there had recognised her, and following her out he said: "0 'A'ishah, how didst thou find her?" "I saw in her," said 'A'ishah, "a jewess like any other jewess." "Say not so," said the Prophet, "for she hath entered Islam and made good her Islam."
None the less, Safiyyah was particularly vulnerable amongst the wives on account of her father. "0 daughter of Huyayy", in itself a respectful address, could be changed by the tone of voice into an insult, and on one
"Whom Lovest Thou Most?" 271
occasion she came to the Prophet in tears because one of her new companions had tried to make her feelinferior. He said: "Say unto them: my father is Aaron, and mine uncle is Moses." _
Of all the wives Safiyyah was the nearest in age to 'A'ishah, nearer even than Hafsah, who was now twenty-two. This had increased 'A'ishah's fears at first; but as the weeks passed the two youngest wives found a certain sympathy for each other, and Hafsah likewise befriended the newcomer. "We were two groups," said 'A'ishah in after years, "in one myself and Hafsah and Safiyyah and Sawdah, and in the other Umm Salamah and the rest of the wives."
'A'ishah was at that time in her sixteenth year, old for her age in some respects but not in others. Her feelings were always dear from her face, and nearly always from her tongue. On one occasion the Prophet said to her: "0 'A'ishah, it is not hidden from me when thou art angered against me, nor yet when thou art pleased." "0 dearer than my father and my mother," she said, "how knowest thou that?" "When thou art pleased," he said, "thou sayst in swearing 'Nay, by the Lord of Muhammad', but when thou art angered it is 'Nay, by the Lord of Abraham'.": On another occasion, when the Prophet came to her somewhat later than she had expected, she said to him: "Where hast thou been this day until now?" "0 little fair one," he said, "I have been with Umm Salamah." "Hast thou not had thy fill of Umm Salamah?" she said; and when he smiled without answering, she added: "0 Messenger of God, tell me of thyself. If thou wert between the two slopes of a valley, one of which had not been grazed whereas the other had been grazed, on which wouldst thou pasture thy flocks?" "On that which had not been grazed," said the Prophet. "Even so," she said; "and 1 am not as any other of thy wives. Every woman of them had a husband before thee, except myself." The Prophet smiled and said nothing.'
'A'ishah knew well that she could not have the Prophet for herself alone. Shewas one woman, and he was as twenty men. The Revelation had said of him: Verily ofan immense magnitude is thy nature. It was as if he were a whole world in himself, comparable to the outer world and in some ways mysteriously one with it. She had often noticed that if there was a roll of thunder, even in the distance, his face would change colour; the sound of a powerful gust of wind would likewise visiblymove him; and on at least one occasion when there was a downpour of rain he bared his head and shoulders and breast and went out into the open so that he might share the delight of the earth in receivingthe bounty of heaven directly upon hisskin.
'A'ishah was not any the less jealous by reason of his difference from other men; but she knew that jealousy, unlike love, was for this life only. Speaking of Paradise, the Revelation had promised more than once: And we remove whatever there may be ofrancour in their breasts.' One day she said to the Prophet: "0 Messenger of God, who are thy wives in Para­ dise?" "Thou art of them," he said, and she treasured these words for the rest of her life, as also his having said to her once: "Gabriel is here and he
1 I.S. VIII, 47. 2 I.S. VIII, 55. 3 VII, 42; XV, 47.
272 Muhammad
giveth thee his greetings of Peace." "Peace be upon him, and the Mercy of God and His Blessings!" she had answered.'
Of her jealousy she would say in after-years: "I was not jealous of any other wife of the Prophet as I was jealous of Khadijah, for his constant mentioning of her and because God had bidden him give her good tidings of a mansion in Paradise of precious stones. And whensoever he sacrificed a sheep, he would send a goodly portion of it unto those who had been her intimate friends. Many a time said I unto him: It is as if there had never· been any other woman in the world, save only Khadijah."?
'A'ishah's perceptions and reactions were exceedingly quick. Soon after Khaybar, or perhaps a little before it, Halah the mother of Abu l-'A~ had corne on a visit to Medina to see her son and daughter-in-law Zaynab and her little granddaughter Umarnah; and one day when the Prophet was in 'A'ishah's apartment there was a knock on the door, and a woman's voice was heard asking if she might enter. The Prophet turned pale and trembled; and immediately divining the cause, 'A'ishah was overwhelmed by a wave of jealousy and scolded him; for she knew that in the voice of Halah he had heard the voice of her sister Khadijah. He confirmed this afterwards, and said that also her manner of asking to enter had been the same as that of his dead wife.'
Sawdah, now grown somewhat elderly, gave her day with the Prophet to 'A'ishah because she felt sure that this would greatly please him; and the rest of the community, including the other wives, had no doubt that of those wives now living it was 'A'ishah that the Prophet loved most. This was not mere conjecture, since from time to time, by one or another of his Companions, he would be asked the question: "0 Messenger of God,
. whom lovest thou most in all the world?" And although he did not always give the same answer to this question, inasmuch as he felt great love in more than one direction - for his daughters and their children, for'Ali, for Abu Bakr, for Zayd and Usarnah - the answer was sometimes 'A'ishah but never one of the other wives. For this reason it was becoming the custom in Medina that if a man had a favour to ask of the Prophet, and if he was offering him a gift with a view to his petition as the Koran recommended, he would postpone the offering until the Prophet was in 'A'ishah's apartment on the assumption that he was then at his happiest and therefore at his readiest to grant favour. This caused ill feeling in the household of the Prophet, and Umm Salamah went to him on behalf of herself and the others asking him to make an announcement that anyone wishing to give him a present should do so without waiting until it was his day to be in a particular house. The Prophet did not answer her, and she asked him a second time, and again he remained silent. Then she asked him a third time, and he said: "Trouble me not with regard unto 'A'ishah, for verily the Revelation cometh no! unto me when I am beneath the coverlet of a wife, except that wife be 'A'ishah."" Umm Salamah said: "I repent unto God for my having troubled thee." But others of the wives were not content to stop there and they sent to Fatimah and asked her to intervene on their behalf and to say to him: "Thy wives adjure thee by God to give
I I.S. VII,s S. 2 B. LXIII, 2.0. ) ibid. 4 B.LI, 8.
"Whom Lovest Thou Most?" 273
them justice in respect of the daughter of Abu Bakr." Fatimah reluctantly agreed to this, but put off doing it for some days until finally her cousin Zaynab, the daughter of jahsh, came to her and insisted. So she went to her father and said what she had been asked to say. "My little daughter," said the Prophet, "lovest thou not what I love?" And when she assented he said: "Then love her" - meaning'A'ishah. Then he said: "It was Zaynab who sent thee, was it not?" "Zaynab and the others," said Fatimah, "I swear," said the Prophet, "it was she who set this afoot." And when Fatimah admitted it, he smiled.
She returned to the wives and recounted what had happened. "0 daughter of God's Messenger," they said, "thou hast availed us nothing!" They pressed her to go a second time, but she refused, so they said to Zaynab "Go thou," and she went to the Prophet, who finally told 'A'ishah to speak to her, and she produced arguments against which Zaynab could say nothing. The Prophet was bound to be just and equitable towards his wives, and to encourage others to follow his example; but he was not responsible for the equity of others towards his own wives. Nor would his sensitivity have allowed him to interfere; it was for him to receive a present with thanks, and to leave all else to the donor. When Zaynab had gone he said to 'A'ishah: "Thou art indeed the daughter of Abu Bakr."
Jealousy was inevitable in the Prophet's household, and he did his best to make light of it. Once he came into a room where his wives and others of his family were assembled, and in his hand was an onyx necklace which had just been given him. Holding it out to them he said: "I shall give this unto her whom I love best of all." Some of the wives began to whisper wryly to each other: "He will give it to the daughter of Abu Bakr." But when he had kept them long enough in suspense, he called his little granddaughter Umamah to him and clasped it round her neck.
He was no less fond of his grandsons, the sons of Ali" and Fatimah. "The dearest unto me of the people of my house are Hasan and Husayn," he would say. Usarnah was counted also as a grandson, and more than once the Prophet took him and Hasan each by a hand and prayed: "0 God, I love them, love them Thou!" 2
1 B. L1, 8; 1.5. VIII, 123. 2 1.5. IVIr, 43.
