LXXXII
The Future
THE Prophet said: "The best of my people are my generation; then they that come after them; then they that come after them"; I and he rejoiced in the outstanding members of his generation, that is in
those whom he considered as his Companions. To ten of them who visited him on one occasion he promised Paradise. These were Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthrnan, 'Ali, 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn 'Awf, Abu 'Ubaydah, Talhah, Zubayr, Sa'd of Zuhrah, and Sa'id the son of Zayd the l;ianif. He had already given the same assurance to some of them before, and the books of his sayings have recorded much of his great praises of the Promised Ten, and of others to whom he also gave good tidings of Paradise, as when he affirmed: "For three doth Paradise long, for 'Ali, 'Ammar' and Salman."l To Fatimah he said: "Thou art the highest of the women of the people of Paradise, excepting only the Virgin Mary, daughter of 'Irnran.": In prediction of the great part to be played by 'Ali as one of the chief transmitters of his wisdom to future generations, he said: "I am the city of knowledge, and 'Ali is its gate";' and he said in general: "My Companions are even as the stars: whichsoever of them ye follow, ye shall be rightly guided.!"
When the men returned from Tabuk they had said amongst themselves that their days of fighting were now at an end; and this idea was so strengthened by the coming of the various delegations, which continued throughout the tenth year, that many of the believers set about selling their arms and their armour. But when the Prophet heard of this he forbade them to do so, saying: "A body of my people will not cease to fight for the truth until the coming forth of the Antichrist." He also said: "If ye knew that which I know, ye would laugh little and weep much"? and "No time cometh upon you but is followed by a worse."! He warned them that his people would surely follow the Jews and the Christians upon the path of degeneration: "Ye will follow them that were before you span by span and cubit by cubit until if they went down the hole of a poisonous reptile ye would follow them down."9 And, in speaking of the lowest ebb which would be reached by mankind in general before the end, he said: "Islam began as a stranger and will become once more as a stranger.'?" Yet he
I B.LXII,I. 1 Seep. 79. 3 Tir.XLVI,33.
4 A. H. III, 64. The Koran tells how the Angels said to Mary: He (God) hath chosen thee
above all the women of the worlds (III, 24). 5 Tir. XL VI, 20. 6 F. XXVI, Manaqib as-Sahabah. 7 B. LXXXI, 27. 8 B.XCII,14. 9 M.XLVII,6. 10 M.I,'23 2.
330 Muhammad
promised that God would not abandon them: "God will send to this community, at the head of every hundred years, one who will renew for it its religion." On another occasion those of his Companions who were with him heard him exclaim more than once: "0 my brethren!" They said to him: "0 Messenger of God, are we not thy brethren?" and he answered: "Ye are my companions. But my brethren are amongst those who have not yet come" - in other versions "who will come in the last days". The way he ,spoke suggested that he was referring to persons of great spiritual eminence.
He also prophesied that despite the evils of the latter days there will arise a caliph whom men will speak of as the Mahdi, which means the rightly guided: "The Mahdi will be of my stock and he will be broad of forehead and aquiline of nose. He will fill the earth with right and with justice even as it hath been filled with wrong and oppression. Seven years will he reign."2
but finally, towards the end of his reign or after it, the Antichrist would come, "a man blind in his right eye in which all light is extinguished, even as it were a grape",3 and he would cause great corruption on earth, and by his power to work marvels he would win more and more men to his side. But there would be a body of believers who would fight against him. "When they are pressing on to fight," said the Prophet, "even while they straighten their lines for the prayer when it is called, Jesus the son of Mary will descend and will lead them in the prayer. And the enemy of God, when he seeth Jesus, will melt even as salt melteth in water. If he were let be, he would melt unto perishing; but God will slay him at the hand of]esus, who will show them his blood upon his lance." 4
He also spoke of many of the signs by which men might know that the coming to pass of these final things was near; and as one of the signs he mentioned the excessive height of the buildings that men would build. But that prophecy was made on a great occasion which must be chronicled more fully, on the authority of 'Umar's son 'Abd Allah, repeating the words of his father.
'Umar said: "One day when we were sitting with the Messenger of God there came unto us a man whose clothes were of exceeding whiteness and whose hair was of exceeding blackness, nor were there any signs of travel upon him, although none of us knew him. He sat down knee unto knee opposite the Prophet, upon whose thighs he placed the palms of his hands, saying: '0 Muhammad, tell me what is the surrender (islam)'. The Messenger of God answered him saying: 'The surrender is to testify that there is no god but God and that Muhammad is God's Messenger, to perform the prayer, bestow the alms, fast Ramadan and make, if thou canst, the pilgrimage to the Holy House.' He said: 'Thou hast spoken truly,' and we were amazed that having questioned him he should corrobo­ rate him. Then he said: 'Tell me what is faith (,man).' He answered: 'To believe in God and His Angels and His Books and His Messengers and the Last Day, and to believe that no good or evil cometh but by His Provi­ dence.' 'Thou hast spoken truly,' he said, and then: 'Tell me what is
I A.D. XXXVI, 1. z A.D. XXXV, 4. 3 M. LII, 20. 4 M. LII, 9.
The Future 331
excellence Ul?san).' He answered: 'To worship God as if thou sawest Him, for if thou seest Him not, yet seeth He thee.' 'Thou hast spoken truly,' he said, and then: 'Tell me of the Hour.' He answered: 'The questioned thereof knoweth no better than the questioner.' He said: 'Then tell me of its signs.' He answered: 'That the slave-girl shall givebirth to her mistress;1
and that those who were but barefoot naked needy herdsmen shall build buildings ever higher and higher.' Then the stranger went away, and I stayed a while after he had gone; and the Prophet said to me: '0 'Umar, knowest thou the questioner, who he was?' I said: 'God and His Messenger know best.' He said: 'It was Gabriel. He came unto you to teach you your religion.' "2
1 A woman giving birth to a daughter will thereby become merely a slave-girl to her by reason of latter-day children's disrespect for their parents. The second part of the saying predicts not only a chaos in the social order but also the ultimate triumph of the sedentary way of life over the nomadic way, that is, the final seal set upon Cain's murder of Abel.
Z M. I, I.
