LXVIII
After Hudaybiyah
XUBASIR of the Bani Thaqif was a young man whose family had come from Ta'if and settled in Mecca as confederates of the Bani Zuhrah. He had entered Islam and they had imprisoned him, but he
escaped and made his way to Medina on foot, arriving there shortly after the Prophet's return from Hudaybiyah, He was soon followed by an envoy of Quraysh who demanded his return. While giving Abu Basir the same words of comfort that he had given to Abu Jandal, the Prophet told him that he was bound by the treaty to deliver him into the hands of the envoy. The Companions, including 'Umar, were now more or less reconciled to the terms of the treaty, so when Abu Basir was led off by the man of Quraysh and the freed slave he had brought with him for support, those Emigrants and Helpers who were present serenely echoed the words of the Prophet: "Be of good cheer! God will surely find thee a way out."
Their hopes were realised sooner than was expected. Despite his youth, Abu Basir was a resourceful man and at the first halt he contrived to get the sword of the envoy and to kill him, whereupon the freedman, Kawthar by name, fled headlong back to Medina. He entered the Mosque unopposed and threw himself at the feet of the Prophet, who happened to be there and who said as he approached: "This man hath seen some terrible thing." Kawthar gasped out that his fellow had been killed and that he himself was all but killed, and it was not long before Abu Basir himself appeared with the drawn sword in his hand. "0 Prophet of God," he said, "thine obligation hath been fulfilled. Thou didst return me unto them, and God hath delivered me." "Alas for his mother!"! said the Prophet. "What a fine firebrand for war, had he but other men with him!" But if Quraysh sent further envoys to demand his return he would be bound to comply, as he had done in the first case. Such an idea however was far from the mind of Abu Basir, who now suggested that the arms and the armour of the dead man together with the camels should be treated as booty, divided into five parts and distributed according to the law. "If I did that," said the Prophet, "they would hold that I had not fulfilled the terms I swore to keep." Then he turned to the terrified survivor of the two Meccans. "The spoil plundered from thy fellow is thy concern," he said. "And take thou back this man to those who sent thee," he added, indicating Abu Basir, Kawthar turned pale: "0 Muhammad," he said, "I value my life. My strength is not
I An often used ellipsis meaning: "The man is such a hothead that his mother will soon have to mourn his death."
258 Muhammad
enough for him, nor have I the hands of two men." The Muslims had fulfilled their obligation, but the representative of Quraysh had refused to take custody of the prisoner. So the Prophet turned to Abu Basir and said: "Go whither thou wilt."
He made his way to the shores of the Red Sea, with the words "had he but other men with him" still in his ears. Nor was he the only one who had taken note of this veiled authorisation and instruction. 'Umar had been intent on what had passed; and he contrived to pass the Prophet's words on to the Muslims in Mecca, together with information about Abu Basir's whereabouts which he soon learned from friendly men of the coastal tribes who came to Medina. Now Suhayl's son, Abu Jandal, was no longer closely guarded by his protectors as he had been by his father; and in any case the treaty had made for a general slackening of vigilance in Mecca as to the watch kept on the young Muslim prisoners, for Muhammad had shown that if they escaped to Medina he would keep to his word and return them. So Abu jandal made his way to Abu Basir, and other youths did the same, including WalId, the brother of Khiilid. Abu Basir made with them a camp at a strategic point on the Meccan caravan route to Syria. They recognised him as their leader and he led them in prayer and advised them on questions concerning the rites and other aspects of the religion, for many of them were recent converts, and they greatly respected him and gladly obeyed him. Quraysh had been rejoicing in the re-established safety of their favourite road to the north. But no less than seventy young men joined Abu Basir's camp, and they became the terror of the caravans. Finally, after they had suffered the loss of many lives and much merchan­ dise, Quraysh sent a letter to the Prophet asking him to take these highwaymen into his community, and promising that they would not ask for them to be returned to Mecca. So the Prophet wrote to Abu Basir that he could now come to Medina with his companions. But meantime the young leader had fallen seriously ill and when the letter arrived death was close upon him. He read it and died clasping it between his hands. His companions prayed over him and buried him, and made a mosque at the place of his burial; then they went to join the Prophetin Medina.'
When they reached the lava tract WalId's camel stumbled and threw him, so that he cut his finger on a stone. As he bound it up, he addressed it in verse, saying:
"What art thou but a finger shedding blood, With no wound else upon the path of God."
But the cut festered, and the wound proved to be mortal. He was able, none the less, before he died, to write a letter to his brother Khalid urging him to enter Islam.
Only one Muslim woman escaped from Mecca at this time and took refuge in Medina, and that was 'Uthman's half-sister, Umm Kulthum, the daughter of his mother Arwa and of 'Uqbah, who had been put to death on the way from Badr. But a Revelation now came forbidding the return of
! W. 624-9; B. LIVj I.I. 751-3.
AfterIfudaybiyah 2.59
any believing women to the disbelievers. So when Umm Kulthiim's two full brothers came to take her back, the Prophet refused to let them have her, and Quraysh accepted his refusal without protest. There had been no mention of women in the treaty. Then Zayd and Zubayr and 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn 'Awf asked for her hand in marriage, and the Prophet advised her to marry Zayd, which she did. _
In the month which followed the treaty, 'A'ishah and her father suffered a great loss which was shortly to be followed by cause for great rejoicing. Umm Ruman fell ill and died. She was buried in the Baqi', and the Prophet prayed over her and descended into her grave. Inevitably the news of her death was brought to Mecca and came to the ears of her son, 'Abd al-Ka'bah; and it is possible that his bereavement prompted him to take an action which he had no doubt been contemplating for some time. However that may be, it was not long after his mother's death that he came to Medina and entered Islam. When he pledged his allegiance, the Prophet changed his name to 'Abd ar-Rahrnan.
Nor was he the only new Muslim at this time. As the weeks and the months passed it became more and more apparent why the Koran had declared the truce to be a clear victory. The men of Mecca and Medina could now meet in peace and converse freely together; and during the next two years the community of Islam was more than doubled.
Soon after the return of the pilgrims a verse had been revealed at which everyone rejoiced: It may be that God will establish love between you and those with whom ye are at enmity.' These words seemed to refer in general to the many conversions which now took place. But they were also taken by some to refer in particular to an unexpected close relationship which was now to be established between the Prophet and one of the leaders of Quraysh.
A few months before Hudaybiyah news had come from Abyssinia of the death of 'Ubayd Allah ibn jahsh, the Prophet's cousin and brother-in-law. He had been a Christian before he entered Islam, and not long after his emigration to Abyssinia he had reverted to Christianity. This had greatly distressed his wife Umm Habibah, Abu Sufyan's daughter, who remained a Muslim; and when four months had elapsed after the death of her husband the Prophet sent a message to the Negus, asking him to stand proxy for himself and to ratify a marriage between him and the widow, if she were willing. To her the Prophet sent no message directly; but she had a dream in which someone came to her and addressed her as "mother ofthe faithful", and she interpreted this as meaning that she would become the wife of the Prophet. The next day she received the message from the Negus which confirmed her dream, whereupon she chose her kinsman Khalid ibn Sa'id" to give her in marriage, and he and the Negus solemnised the pact between them in the presence of ja'far and others of the brethren. Then the Negus held a wedding feast in his palace, and all the Muslims were invited.
The Prophet had also sent word to ja'far that it would please him if he and his community would now come to live in Medina. ja'far forthwith set about making preparations for the journey, and the Negus gave them two
I LX, 70. 2 See p. 47.
260 Muhammad
boats. It was decided that Umm Habibah should travel with them; and in Medina work was begun on the building of an apartment for her next to those ofthe other wives.
The Negus was not the only reigning prince to whom the Prophet sent a letter at this time. When he had split the seemingly invincible rock in the trench, he had seen the castles of the Yemen by the light which had flared from it at his first blow, whereas by the light which flared from his third and final blow he had seen the white palace of Chosroes at Mada'in, As to the certainty which had then been given him about the future spread of the empire of Islam, there was a connection between these two lights inasmuch as the Yemen was now under the rule of Persia; and the Prophet was moved to write to the Persian monarch, informing him of his Prophethood and summoning him to Islam. He may not have had much hopes of the success of his message, but it was necessary to offer him the possibility of making the right choice before any other action was taken.
As to the second of the three lights, it had revealed the castles of Syria, and the Prophet had received from it the certainty of the spread of Islam to those parts and also to the West. He now dictated a letter to Heraclius the Roman Emperor in the same terms as the letter to Persia, and he sent it to the governor of Syria. Another similar letter was sent to Alexandria, to the Muqawqis, the ruler of Egypt.
Meantime Chosroes had heard from other sources of the growing power of the Arab king of Yathrib who claimed to be a Prophet. So he dispatched an order to Badhan, his viceroy in the Yemen, asking for further and clearer information about Muhammad. Badhan forthwith sent two en­ voys to Medina, so that they co~ld see for themselves and bring him back news. Following a fashion that was prevalent at the Persian court, they had shaved their beards and grown long moustaches. Their appearance was abhorrent to the Prophet. "Who bade you do this?" he exclaimed. "Our lord," they said, meaning Chosroes." "My Lord," said the Prophet, "hath bidden me grow my beard and cut short my moustache." He sent them away, telling them to return to him the next day. That night Gabriel told him that on the same day there had been an uprising in Persia in which Chosroes had been killed, and his son now reigned in his stead. So when the envoys returned he told them of this, and bade them inform their master the viceroy. Then he said: "Tell him that my religion and mine empire will reach far beyond the kingdom of Chosroes; and say unto him from me: Enter Islam, and I will confirm thee in what thou hast, and I will appoint thee king over thy people in the Yemen."
They returned to San'a', not knowing what to think, and delivered the message to Badhan, who said: "We will see what befalleth. If what he said be true, then is he a Prophet whom God hath sent." But even before he had had time to send a man to Persia to find out the truth of the matter, a messenger arrived from Siroes, the new Shah, announcing what had happened, and claiming their allegiance. Instead of replying, Badhan entered [slam, and so did his two messengers and other Persians who were with him. He then sent word to Medina, and the Prophet confirmed his rule over the Yemen. That was the beginning of the fulfilment of what had been revealed in the first flash of light from the trench.
Afterlfudaybiyah 26 I
The Prophet's letter reached Mada'in after the death of Chosroes, so it was delivered to his successor, whose sole answer was to tear it in pieces. "Even so, 0 Lord, tear from him his kingdom," said the Prophet when he heard of this.
In these same weeks after the return of the pilgrims there was an attack on the Prophet's life by a means which had not yet been used against him. In every generation of the Jews in Arabia there could be found one or two adepts in the science of magic; and one of these was amongst the Jews still living in Medina, Labid by name, an expert sorcerer who had also instructed his daughters in the subtle art lest his own knowledge should die with him. Labid now received a heavy bribe to put as deadly a spell as he could upon the Prophet. For this purpose he needed some combings of his hair, which he or one of his daughters contrived to procure, possibly through the intermediary of an entirely innocent person. He tied eleven knots in the hair, and his daughters breathed imprecations upon each knot. Theil he attached it to a sprig from a male date-palm which had on it the outer sheath of the pollen, and threw it into a deep well. The spell could only be undone by the untying of the knots.
The Prophet was soon aware that something was seriously wrong. On the one hand his memory began to fail him, while on the other hand he began to imagine that he had done things which in fact he had not done. He was also overcome with weakness, and when food was pressed upon him he could not bring himself to eat. He prayed God to cure him, and in his sleep he was conscious of two persons, one sitting at his head and the other at his feet. He heard one of them inform the other of the exact cause of his infirmity and of the name ofthe well. I When he woke Gabriel came to him, and confirming his dream he gave him two siaabs of the Koran, one of which contains five verses and the other six. The Prophet sent 'All to the well, telling him to recite over it the two surabs. At each verse one of the knots untied itself until all were untied and the Prophet recovered his full strength of mind and body.'
The first of the two siirahs is:
Say: I take refuge in the Lord ofdaybreak (rom the euil of that which He hath created, and from the evil ofdusk when it dimmeth into night, and from the evil ofthe women who breathe upon knots, and from the evil of the envier when he enuieth,'
The second is: Say: I take refuge in the Lord ofmen,
The King ofmen, the God ofmen, from the evil of the stealthy whisperer, who tohispereth in the breasts ofmen; from iinn and from men.'
J B. LIX, ro. 2 Baydawi on K. CXIII, 4. J CXIII. , CXIV. According to some authorities these two surahs which were recited on this
occasion were not then newly revealed but had been given to the Prophet in Mecca before the Hijrah.
262 Muhammad
These siaahs are placed last of all in the Koran. They are called "the two takings of refuge", and are recited continually for protection against all manner of evil.
The Prophet ordered the well to be filled up and another to be dug near at hand to replace it. He sent for Labid, who confessed to having placed the spell upon him for the sake of a bribe, but he did not take any action against him.
