LXXXIII
The Farewell Pilgrimage
W H EN the Prophet was in Medina during Ramadan it was his wont to make a spiritual retreat in the Mosque during the middle ten days of the month, and some of his Companions would do
the same. But this year, having kept the ten appointed days, he invited his Companions to remain in retreat with him for another ten days, that is until the end of the month, which they did. It was in Ramadan every year that Gabriel would come to him to make sure that nothing of the Revelation had slipped from his memory; and this year, after the retreat, the Prophet confided to Fatimah, as a secret not yet to be told to others: "Gabriel reciteth the Koran unto me and I unto him once every year; but this year he hath recited it with me twice. I cannot but think that my time hath come."!
The month of Shawwal passed; and in the eleventh month of the year it was proclaimed throughout Medina that the Prophet himself would lead the Pilgrimage. The news was sent to the desert tribes, and multitudes flocked to the oasis from all directions, glad of the opportunity of accompanying the Messenger at every step of the way. The Pilgrimage would be unlike any that had taken place for hundreds of years: the pilgrims would all be worshippers of the One God, and no idolater would desecrate the Holy House with the performance of any heathen rites. Five days before the end of the month the Prophet set out from Medina at the head of over thirty thousand men and women. All his wives were present, each in her howdah, escorted by 'Abd ar-Rahrnan ibn 'Awf and 'Uthman ibn 'Affan. Abu Bakr was accompanied by his wife, Asma', and at one of the first halts she gave birth to a son, whom they named Muhammad. Abu Bakr was for sending her back to Medina, but the Prophet told him to tell her to perform the greater ablution and then to consecrate herself for the Pilgrimage, and to go with them as she had planned.
At sunset on the tenth day after leaving Medina the Prophet reached the pass through which he had entered Mecca on the day of the victory. There he spent the night, and the next morning he rode down to the Hollow. When he came within sight of the Ka'bah he raised his hands in reverence,
1 B.LXI, 2.5.
The Farewell Pilgrimage 333
letting fall the rein of his camel, which he then took up in his left hand, and with his right hand held out in supplication he prayed: "0 God, increase this House in the honour and magnification and bounty and reverence and piety that it receiveth from mankind!": He entered the Mosque and made the seven rounds of the Ka'bah, after which he prayed at the Station of Abraham. Then going out to Safa he went seven times between it and Marwah, and those who were with him did their best to record in their memories the exact words of praise and prayer that he uttered at every station.
Returning to the Mosque, he now entered the Ka'bah with the keeper of its keys, 'Uthman of 'Abd ad-Dar, taking with him also Bilal and Usamah as before. But that evening when he visited 'A'ishah in her tent she noticed that he was sad and asked him why. "I have done a thing today," he said, "that I would I had not done. I entered the House; and it may be that a man of my people" - he meant in years to come - "will not be able to enter it and that he will therefore feel some disquiet in his soul. And we were only ordered to go round it, not ordered to enter it.":'
Again he refused to lodge in any house in Mecca despite the plea of Umm Hani' that he would stay with her; and on the eighth day of the new moon he rode to the valley of Mina followed by the rest of the pilgrims. Having spent the night there, he rode on after daybreak to 'Arafah, a broad valley about thirteen miles east of Mecca, just outside the sacred precinct. 'Arafah is on the road to Ta'if and is bounded north and east by the mountains of Ta'if, But separate from these, and surrounded on all sides by the valley, is a hill which is also named 'Arafah or the Mount of Mercy. It is the central part of this pilgrimage station, which extends none the less over most of the lower ground; and it was on this hill that the Prophet took up his station that day.
Some of the Meccans expressed surprise that he had gone so far, for while the other pilgrims went on to 'Arafah Quraysh had been accustomed to remain within the sacred precinct saying: "We are the people of God." But he said that Abraham had ordained the day on 'Arafah as an essential part of the Pilgrimage, and that Quraysh had forsaken his practice in this respect. The Prophet stressed that day the antiquity of the Pilgrimage, and the words "Abraham's legacy" were often on his lips.
To impress on all the tribes that henceforth blood feuds were at an end throughout the whole community of Islam and that each man's life and possessions were sacrosanct, he sent as crier throughout the multitude Safwan's brother Rabi'ah, who had a powerful voice, and told him to proclaim: "The Messenger of God saith: See ye what month this is?" They were silent, and he answered: "The holy month." Then he asked: "See ye what land this is?" Again they were silent and he answered: "The holy land." Then he said: "See ye what day this is?" And again it was he who gave the answer: "The day of the Greater Pilgrimage." Then he proclaimed according to the Prophet's instructions: "Verily God hath made inviolable for you each other's blood and each other's property, until ye meet your Lord, even as He hath made inviolable this your day, in this your land, in this your month."
W.1097. 1 W. IIOO.
334 Muhammad
When the sun had passed its zenith the Prophet preached a sermon which he began, after praising God, with the words: "Hear me, 0 people, for] know not if ever] shall meet with you in this place after this year." Then he exhorted them to treat one another well and gave them many reminders of what was commanded and what was forbidden. Finally he said: "I have left amongst you that which, if ye hold fast to it, shall preserve you from all error, a clear indication, the Book of God and the word of His Prophet. 0 people, hear my words and understand." He then imparted to them a Revelation which he had just received and which completed the Koran, for it was the last passage to be revealed: This day the disbelievers despair of prevailing against your religion, so fear them not, but fear Me! This day have I perfected for you your religion and fulfilled My favour unto you, and it hath been My good pleasure to choose Islam for you as your religion. 1
He ended his brief sermon with an earnest question: "0 people, have I faithfully delivered unto you my message?" A powerful murmur of assent, "0 God, yea!", arose from thousands of throats and the vibrant words Alliihumma na'm rolled like thunder throughout the valley. The Prophet raised his forefinger and said: "0 God, bear witnessl'"
The ritual prayers were then prayed and the restofthe Day of'Arafah, as it is called, was spent in meditation and supplication. But as soon as the sun had set the Prophet mounted his camel, and bidding Usamah mount behind him he rode down from the hill and across the valley in the direction of Mecca, followed by his fellow pilgrims. It was the tradition to ride quickly at this point, but at the first signs of excess he cried out: "Gently, gently! In quietness of soul! And let the strong amongst you have a care for the weak!" They spent the night at Muzdalifah, which is within the sacred precinct, and there they collected small pebbles with which to stone Satan, who is represented by three pillars at 'Aqabah in the valley of Mina. Sawdah asked the Prophet's permission to leave Muzdalifah in the small hours. Being large in stature and heavier than most of the women, she had suffered more from the heat and from the exertions of travel, and she was anxious to perform the rite of stoning before the multitude arrived. So he sent her on ahead in the company of Umm Sulaym, escorted by 'Abd Allah, one of the sons of 'Abbas.
The Prophet himself prayed the dawn prayer in Muzdalifah, and then led the pilgrims to 'Aqabah, with Fa<;II mounted behind him on his camel. It was at this very spot on this very day twelve years previously that he had met the six men of Khazraj who had pledged their allegiance to him, thus preparing the way for the First and Second 'Aqabah pacts. After the stoning, the animals were sacrificed, and the Prophet called for a man to shave his head. The pilgrims gathered round him in the hopes of obtaining some locks of his hair. Abu Bakr remarked afterwards on the contrast between the Khalid of Uhud and the Trench and the Khalid who now said: "0 Messenger of God, thy forelock! Give it unto none but me, my father and my mother by thy ransom!" 3 And when the Prophet gave it him he pressed it reverently against his eyes and his lips.
I V,3. ,1 W.II08.
The Farewell Pilgrimage 335
The Prophet now bade the pilgrims visit the Ka'bah and return to spend that night and the two next nights in Mina. He himself waited untilthe late afternoon. Then his wives accompanied him to Mecca, all but 'A'ishah, who was not in a state of ritual purity. A few days later, as soon as she was able, he sent her outside the sacred precinct, escorted by her brother 'Abd ar-Rahrnan. There she consecrated herself afresh, and going to Mecca she made the rounds of the Ka'bah.
Having finished the campaign in the Yemen, the troop of three hundred horse that the Prophet had sent out in Ramadan was now approaching Mecca from the south. 'All had ridden on ahead ofhis men, eager to meet the Prophet as soon as possible and to make with him the Pilgrimage, which he now had done. Amongst the state's fifth of the spoils there was enough linen to clothe the whole army, but'All had decided that itmust be handed over to the Prophet untouched. In his absence, however, the man he had left in charge was persuaded to lend each man a new change of clothes out of the linen. The change was much needed for they had been away from home for nearly three months. When they were not far from entering the city, 'All rode out to meet them and was amazed to see the transformation that had taken place. "I gave them the garments," said the deputy commander, "that their appearance might be more seemly when they entered in among the people." The men all knew that everyone in Mecca would now be wearing their finest clothes in honour of the Feast, and they were anxious to look their best. But 'All felt he could not countenance such a liberty and he ordered them to put on their old clothes again and return the new ones to the spoils. Great resentment was felt throughout the army on this account, and when the Prophet heard of it he said: "0 people, blame not 'Ali, for he is too scrupulous in the path of God to be blamed." But these words were not sufficient, or it may be that they were only heard by a few, and the resentment continued.
On the way back to Medina one of the troops bitterly complained of'Ali to the Prophet, whose face changed colour. "Am I not nearer to the believers than their own selves?" he said; and when the man assented, he added: "Whose nearest I am, his nearest 'All is." Later on the journey, when they had halted at Ghadir al-Khumm, he gathered all the people together, and taking 'Ali by the hand he repeated these words, to which he added the prayer: "0 God, be the friend of him who is his friend, and the foe of him who is his foe"; and the murmurings against 'Ali were silenced. 1
One of the deputations of the previous year had been from a Christian tribe in Yamamah, the Bani Hanifah, whose territory lay along the eastern boundary of Najd. They had agreed to enter Islam; but now one of their men, Musaylimah by name, claimed that he too was a Prophet, and not long after the return of the pilgrims from Mecca the following letter was brought to Medina by two envoys from Yarnamah: "From Musaylimah the Messenger of God to Muhammad the Messenger of God, peace be on thee! It hath been given me to share with thee the authority. Half the earth is ours, and half belongeth unto Quraysh, although they are a people who
I Ibn Kathir, al-Biddyah wa n-nihdyah, V, 209.
336 Muhammad
transgress." The Prophet asked the envoys what they thought of the matter and they said: "Our opinion is even as his." "By God," said the Prophet, "if it were not that envoys may not be slain I would cut off your heads." Then he dictated a letter for them to give to their master: "From Mu­ hammad the Messenger of God to Musaylimah the liar. Peace be on him who followeth the guidance! Verily the earth is God's; He causeth whom He will of His slaves to inherit it; and the final issue is in favour of the pious".'
Two other impostors arose about this time, Tulayhah, a chief of the Bani Asad, and Aswad ibn Ka'b of the Yemen. The Yemenite had a brief success and rapidly gained control over a wide area, but his pride soon turned many of his followers against him; and after a few months he was assassinated. Tulayhah was finally defeated by Khalid, and renouncing all his claims he became a strength for Islam. As to Musaylimah, it was his destiny to be pierced by a javelin from the hand of Wal,tshl, while 'Abd Allah, the son of Nusaybah, struck him a mortal blow with his sword. But this defeat took place several months later. For the moment, as the moon of the Pilgrimage waned and as the eleventh year of the Hijrah opened, all these impostors were potential dangers to Islam; and there was also a woman of Tarnirn named Sajah, who claimed to be a prophetess. But the Prophet was not disposed to take immediate action against any of them. His attention was turned towards the north, and in the last days of Safar, the second month of the year, that is the end of May in AD 632, he decided that the time had come to reverse the defeat of Mut'ah. Having ordered preparations to be made for a campaign against those Arab tribes of Syria which had flanked the imperial legions on the day when Zayd and ja'far were killed, he called Zayd's son Usamah to him and put him, despite his youth, in command of the three-thousand-strong army.
, 1.1. 965.
