LXXI
After Khaybar
TH E campaign of Khaybar was followed by six relatively small expeditions two of which, under 'Umar and Abu Bakr respectively, were against hostile clans of the tribe of Hawazin whose territory
blocked the main approach to the Yemen. The others were to the east and the north, against clans of Ghatafan. Two of these were against the Bani Murrah, whose territory adjoined the oasis of Fadak, which now belonged to the Prophet. Reduced to being his tenants, the Jews of Fadak required protection against the Bedouin; but the strength of these marauders was underestimated in Medina, so that only thirty men were sent on the first expedition, and they were nearly all killed. The Prophet immediately sent out a second force of two hundred, and the enemy were put to flight with considerable loss of life. There were also some captives taken, as well as camels and sheep. The seventeen-year-old Usamah was allowed to take part in this expedition. He had been with the army behind the Trench, but this was his first campaign in the fullest sense. During the encounter, a man of Murrah mocked at him on account of his youth. He soon had reason to regret it. Already bent on showing his mettle, Usamah was now goaded to fury and pursued the man far into the desert despite the orders given before the battle that they should all keep together; He finally caught up with him and wounded him, whereupon the Murrite shouted La ilaha tns Lliih, there is no god but God. But despite this testification of Islam, Usamah dealt him the death-blow.
The commander of the expedition was Ghalib ibn 'Abd Allah;! and one of his first thoughts after the battle was: "Where is Usamah?" He and every other man in the army knew of the Prophet's great love for the son of Zayd; and despite the victory it was to an exceedingly troubled camp that Usamah returned, one hour after nightfall. Ghalib sternly rated him. "I went after a man who was scoffing at me," said the youth, "and when I had come up with him and had fleshed him, he said La iliiha illa Lldh," "Whereupon thou didst sheathe thy sword?" said Ghalib. "Nay," said Usamah, "not until I had made him drink the draught of death." At that the whole camp thundered abuse, and he buried his head in his hands, overcome with shame. Nor could he bring himself to eat any food during the march home. There had been a Revelation which the older men well knew in connection with one or two cases where a believer had been about
I Of the Bani Layth, a clan of Kinanah,
After Khaybar 2.75
to kill a disbeliever, who had then professed Islam; and exasperated at the idea of losing the spoils of armour and weapons which he had thought were his, the victor had said "Thou art not a believer," and had killed him. In Usamah's case the motive had been honour not spoils, but the principle was the same. The revealed verse was: 0 ye who believe, when ye fight in the way ofGod, discriminate, nor say unto him who proffereth you peace: "Thou art not a believer, " seeking the gains ofthis lower life, for with God are spoils in plenty. Thus were ye wont to be aforetime, but God hath sent down His Grace upon you. Therefore discriminate. Verily God is In­ formed ofwhat ye do:
As soon as they reached Medina Usamah went to the Prophet, who fondly embraced him. Then he said: "Now tell me of thy campaign." So Usamah told him all that had happened since they had set out, and when he reached the point where he had killed the man, the Prophet said: "Didst thou, 0 Usarnah, slay him when he had said Iii ildha illa Lliih? "0 Messenger of God," he answered, "he did but say it to escape from being slain." "And so," said the Prophet, "thou didst split open his heart to know if he spake the truth or if he lied!" "Never again will I slay any man who saith Iiiildha tus Lliih," said Usarnah. And he would say afterwards: "I wished that I had only entered Islam on that day."? For the Prophet had affirmed that the entry into the religion effaces the guilt of all past sins.
After his return from Khaybar the Prophet himself stayed in Medina for nine months. Despite the lesser campaigns, the truce to the south and the victory to the north made these months a time of relative peace and prosperity, though the wealth which had been won from the Garden of the Hijaz gave rise also to certain problems.
'Umar came one morning to the house of the Messenger, and as he approached he heard the sound of women's voices raised to a pitch which he considered to be unseemly in the prophetic presence. The women were moreover of Quraysh, that is, of the Emigrants, which confirmed his opinion that they were learning bad ways from the women of Medina who for generations had been less restrained and more self-assertive than the women of Mecca. The Prophet hated to refuse a request, as well they knew, and they were now asking him with some insistence to give them various garments which had come to him as part of his fifth in the spoils of war. There was a curtain spread across part of the room, and when 'Umar's voice was heard asking permission to enter there was a sudden total silence and the women hid themselves behind the curtain with such speed that he entered to find the Prophet speechless with laughter. "May God fill thy life with laughter, 0 Messenger of God," he said. "Wondrous it was," said the Prophet, "how these women who were with me even now - how speedily upon hearing thy voice they were gone behind that curtain!" "It is rather thy right, not mine, that they should stand in awe of thee, not of me," said 'Umar. Then, addressing the women, he said: "0 enemies of yourselves, fear ye me, and fear ye not God's Messenger?" "It is even so," they said, "for thou art rougher and harsher than God's Messenger." "That is true, o son of Khattab," said the Prophet. Then he added: "By Him in whose
1 IV, 94.
276 Muhammad
hand is my soul, if Satan found that thou wert travelling upon a certain path, he would choose to go himself by any other path but thine."!
The newly won wealth and the consequent easing of the situation encouraged even Umm Ayman to ask the Prophet for a favour. She had long felt the need of a camel that she could call her own; and now she went to him and asked him to give her a mount. He looked at her seriously and said: "I will mount thee on the child of a camel." "0 Messenger of God," she exclaimed, thinking that he meant a calf, "that is not meet for me. I want it not." "I will not mount thee," he said "save on the child of a camel." 2 And so the altercation continued until a smile on the Prophet's face made her realise that he was teasing her and that every camel is necessarily the child of a camel.
On another day, however, 'Umar found the Prophet in less good humour, with his head resting on his hand which was against his cheek. "0 'Umar," he said, "they ask of me that which I have not." He had said on his way to Khaybar, speaking of the increase of riches that the promised victory would bring to Medina: "It will not be good for you." It was as he had said, and this applied to his own household as well as to others. Until then the Prophet and his family had lived a life of the utmost frugality. 'A'ishah said that before Khaybar she had not known what it was to eat her fill of dates. Such was the poverty of their ever-increasing dependants that the Prophet's wives had only asked him for what they needed, and not always that. Things that could be dispensed with were given away, or else sold so that the money could be charitably spent. But the Prophet now had the pleasure of giving presents to his wives, and they for their part were not slow in learning to ask for more, which sometimes created problems, because equity demanded that what was given to one must be given to all.
At the same time they began to take advantage of his indulgence in other ways. One day 'Umar rebuked his wife for something and she sharply answered him back: and when he expostulated with her she replied that the wives of the Prophet were in the habit of answering him back so why should she not do the same. "And there is one of them," she added, meaning their daughter, "who speaketh unto him her mind unabashed from morn till night." Greatly troubled by this, 'Umar went to Hafsah, who did not deny that what her mother had said was true. "Thou hast neither the grace of 'A'ishah nor the beauty of Zaynab," he said, hoping to shake her self-confidence; and when these words seemed to have no effect, he added: "Art thou so sure that if thou angerest the Prophet, God will not destroy thee in His anger?"! Then he went to his cousin Umm Salamah and said: "Is it true that ye speak your minds unto God's Messenger and answer him without respect?" "By all that is wonderful," said Umm Salamah, "what call hast thou to come between God's Messenger and his wives? Yea, by God, we speak unto him our minds, and if he suffer us to do so that is his affair, and if he forbid us he will find us more obedient unto him than we are unto thee.?' 'Umar felt that he had gone too far, and that the reproof was just; but there could be no doubt that all was not well in the Prophet's household.
1 B. LXII, 6. 2 I.S.VIII, 163. 1 I.S.VIII, 13 I. 4 I.S.VIII, 137.
After Khaybar 277
The relatively sudden redress which now took place was partly due to an altogether unexpected event. The Prophet's letter to the Muqawqis, summoning him to Islam, was answered evasively; but with his answer the ruler of Egypt sent a rich present of a thousand measures of gold, twenty robes of fine cloth, a mule, a she-ass and, as the crown of the gift, two Coptic Christian slave girls escorted by an elderly eunuch. The girls were sisters, Mariyah and Sirin, and both were beautiful, but Mariyah was exceptionally so, and the Prophet marvelled at her beauty. He gave Sirin to Hassan ibn Thabit, and lodged Mariyah in the nearby house where Safiyyah had lived before her apartment adjoining the Mosque was built. There he would visit her both by day and by night; but his wives became so openly jealous that she was unhappy, and he then lodged her in Upper Medina. 'A'ishah and the others were at first relieved, but they soon found that they had gained nothing. For the Prophet did not visit Mariyah any the less often, and the added distance meant that his absences were even longer than before.
They well knew that he was altogether within his rights - rights which had been recognised from the time of Abraham and before. Were they not all, except Safiyyah, descended from the union of Abraham with the bondmaid Hagar? Moreover, the law revealed to Moses had corroborated such rights, and the Koran itself expressly allowed a master to take his bondmaid as concubine on condition of her free consent. But the wives also knew that the Prophet was exceedingly sensitive, and they saw to it that his whole domestic life was now penetrated by their deliberately undisguised reactions. In particular Hafsah gave vent to such feeling that the Prophet _was finally induced to swear that he would not see Mariyah again, and 'A'ishah was Hafsah's accomplice on this occasion.
The Revelation which now came is known as the Surah of Banning' because it opens with a reproof to the Prophet for having banned Mariyah from his life: 0 Prophet why bannest thou, to please thy wives, that which God hath made lawful unto thee? Then, having formally absolved him from his oath, it addresses Hafsah and 'A'ishah, though not by name: If ye twain repent unto God ye have cause, for your hearts were set upon the ban; and if ye aid each the other against him, verily God, even He, is his Protecting Friend, and Gabriel, and the elect of the faithful; and beyond these, the angels are massed to help him. The next verse is addressed to all the wives: It may be, ifhe divorce you, that his Lord will give him wives in your stead who are better than you, submissive unto God, believing, devout, penitent, inclined unto worship and fasting, widows and virgin maids.
The Surah ends with examples from sacred history of two evil women and two women who were perfect:
Gad citeth as example for those who disbelieve, the Wife of Noah and the wife ofLot. They were under two righteous men from amongst Our slaves, men whom they betrayed and who thus availed them naught against God; and it was said unto both: Enter ye the fire with them who enter it. I LXVI.
278 Muhammad
And God citeth as example for those who believe the wife ofPharaoh when she said: "My Lord, build for me a dwelling with Thee in Paradise, and save me from Pharaoh and his deeds, and save me from the people who transgress"; and Mary, the daughter otlmriin, who kept chaste her womb and We breathed therein of Our Spirit. And she testified to the truth ofthe words ofher Lord and His scriptures, and was ofthose who are absorbed in prayer.
When he had recited this Revelation to his wives, the Prophet left them to meditate upon it, and withdrew to a roofed verandah which was the only room he had but for their apartments. News spread throughout Medina that he had divorced his wives, and it came to the ears of 'Umar that night. At dawn he went as usual to the Mosque, but immediately after the prayer, before 'Umar could address him, the Prophet withdrew to his porch. 'Umar went to Hafsah and found her in tears. "Why weepest thou?" he said, adding before she could answer: "Did I not tell thee this would happen? Hath God's Messenger divorced you?" "I know not," she said, "but he is there, secluded by himself in that porch." Its entrance was from the Mosque, to which 'Umar now returned. There were gathered a group of men, sitting round the pulpit. Some of them were in tears; 'Umar sat with them for a while and then unable to endure his feelings he went to the door of the porch where a black Abyssinian boy, a servant of the Prophet, was standing. "Ask permission for 'Umar to enter," he said to the boy, who went in and then came out after a moment saying: "I mentioned thee to him, but he was silent." 'Umar returned to where he had been sitting. Then he went again to ask if he might enter, and again he was told that the Prophet had made no response. This happened yet a third time; but just as 'Umar had turned away the boy called out to him that the Prophet had said he might enter. 'Umar went in and found him reclining on a rush mat. His back, which was partly bare, showed clearly the marks of the matting where it had pressed against his skin. A leather cushion, stuffed with palm fibre, was at his side, and on this he was leaning. His eyes were downcast, and he did not look at 'Umar as he entered. "0 Messenger of God," said 'Umar, "hast thou divorced thy wives?" The Prophet raised his eyes to 'Umar's, "Nay, I have not," he said. "A/liihu Akbar!" exclaimed 'Umar, in a voice which could be heard in all the neighbouring houses. Umm Salamah said afterwards: "I was weeping, and when anyone came unto me they said 'Hath God's Messenger divorced thee?' and I said 'By God, I know not.' This continued until 'Umar came to the Prophet. We heard his magnification - we were all in our apartments - and we knew that the Messenger of God had answered 'Nay' to his question." There was in fact only one question in anybody's mind, and they were certain that 'Umar would be especially preoccupied with it on account of his daughter.
"I stood there," said 'Umar, "feeling my way with the Messenger of God as to what was his state, and I said: 'We were used to having, we men of Quraysh, the upper hand over our wives, but when we came to Medina we came unto a people whose wives have the upper hand over them.'" He saw a suggestion of a smile cross the Prophet's face, so he went on to tell him what he had previously said to Hafsah by way of warning, and again the
After Khaybar 279
Prophet smiled... whereupon he ventured to sit down. Once more he was struck by the bareness of the room - a mat on the floor, three leather cushions, and nothing else. He suggested that the Prophet should allow himself more luxury, and by way of contrast he mentioned the Greeks and the Persians, but he was cut short with the words: "Art thou in any doubt, o son of Khattab? Their good things have been hastened on for them in this their earthly life."
It was now the time of the new moon, and the Prophet let it be known to his wives that he did not wish to see any of them until the month had passed. When the moon had altogether waned, he went first to 'A'ishah's apartment. Delighted to see him, yet surprised, she said to him: "It is but twenty-nine nights." "How dost thou know?" he asked, and she answered: "I have been counting them - how I have counted them!" "But this was a month of twenty-nine," he said. She had forgotten that a lunar month is sometimes only twenty-nine days instead of thirty. He then told her of another Revelation he had received, which made it necessary for him to put before her a choice between two possibilities. He said he had asked her father to help him by counselling her in this matter. "Nay," said 'A'ishah, "none shall help thee with regard to me. But tell me what it is, 0 Messenger of God." He answered saying: "God putteth before thee this choice," and then he recited the newly revealed verses: 0 Prophet, say unto thy wives: If ye desire this lower life and its adornments, then come and I will bestow its goods upon you, and I will release you with a fair release. But if ye desire God and His messenger and the abode of the Hereafter, then verily God hath laid in store for you a meed immense, for such ofyou as do good. 1 She said: "Verily I desire God and His messenger and the abode of the Hereafter." And there was not one of his wives who did not say the same.
I XXVIII, 2.8-9.
